SUMMER DAYS ALONG
THE ATLANTIC OCEAN...
THIS IS THE OUTER COAST OF
CAPE COD, MASSACHUSETTS...
FROM A PORTRAIT
MADE IN 1981.
HIGH, WIDE BEACHES...
TOWERING CLIFFS...
GRASSY DUNES...
A COAST FOREVER THE SAME,
AND YET UNDERGOING A SLOW,
RELENTLESS TRANSFORMATION
SPANNING THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
A COAST BEING SUBMERGED
BY A RISING SEA.
TODAY, IN THE EARLY PART OF THE
21ST CENTURY, THIS COAST IS
STILL RETREATING AN AVERAGE
OF TWO TO THREE FEET A YEAR.
BUT ONE THING IS DIFFERENT:
MOST SCIENTISTS NOW BELIEVE
THAT SEA LEVEL RISE IS IN PART
A RESULT OF MAN'S OWN DOING.
THAT THE RELEASE OF
HEAT-TRAPPING GREENHOUSE GASES
INTO THE ATMOSPHERE IS A MAJOR
CAUSE FOR THE RISE IN
TEMPERATURES AROUND THE GLOBE,
AND THUS THE RISE IN SEA LEVEL.
THE OUTER COAST OF THE
CAPE LOOKS MUCH AS IT DID
IN THE SUMMER
OF 1978,
BUT IT'S ONLY BECAUSE
IT'S BEEN LEFT ALONE
- CAPE CODDERS
REALIZING LONG AGO
THAT TO TRY TO STOP THE SEA
ALONG THIS BEACH WAS UNWISE.
THESE CLIFFS PROBABLY LOOKED
THE SAME 500 YEARS AGO,
BUT STOOD A QUARTER
OF A MILE OUT TO SEA.
THIS BARRIER BEACH HAS LOOKED
THE SAME FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS,
BUT IT'S BEEN RETREATING,
MAINTAINING ITS GENERAL FORM
BUT MIGRATING
LANDWARD.
THIS SALT MARSH APPEARS
THE SAME AS IN YEARS PAST
BUT ITS BORDERS HAVE
BEEN CREEPING INLAND.
THIS COAST IS BEING
SUBMERGED BY A COMBINATION
OF THE SINKING OF THE
LAND AND A RISING SEA.
SOME COASTS OF THE WORLD
ARE NOT BEING SUBMERGED -
PLACES WHERE THE LAND
IS RISING AT THE SAME RATE
OR EVEN FASTER
THAN SEA LEVEL.
BUT ALONG THIS COAST, ALONG THE
EAST COAST OF THE UNITED STATES,
THE LAND IS BEING SUBMERGED
AT A RATE OF ABOUT
A VERTICAL FOOT
EVERY HUNDRED YEARS.
AND IN LOW-LYING AREAS A
ONE-FOOT RISE IN SEA LEVEL
COULD SEND WATER LANDWARD
BY HUNDREDS OF FEET.
FORMED BY VAST ICE SHEETS TOWARD
THE END OF THE LAST ICE AGE,
CAPE COD CONSISTS ALMOST
ENTIRELY OF SAND, GRAVEL, SILT,
CLAY AND BOULDERS LEFT BY THE
GLACIERS AFTER THEIR RETREAT
SOME 15,000 YEARS AGO.
THE OUTLINE OF THIS
COAST LOOKED LIKE THIS.
AS GLACIERS MELTED AND SEA
LEVEL INCREASED, WIND, WAVES,
AND TIDES BEGAN TO SHAPE IT
AND ITS PROFILE EVOLVED.
THE OUTER ARM OF THE
CAPE STARTED TO TAKE
ITS PRESENT SHAPE
AROUND 6,000 YEARS AGO...
5,000...
3,700...
2,000...
AND TODAY.
EVIDENCE OF SEA LEVEL RISE
CAN BE SEEN IN THESE PHOTOS.
IN EACH, THE YELLOW LINE SHOWS
THE UPPER LIMIT OF THE BLACK
ZONE OF A PARTICULAR ALGAE WHICH
GROWS ONLY NEAR SEA LEVEL.
THE DIFFERENCE IS SOME 13 TO 14
INCHES HIGHER IN THE YEAR 2000
THAN IN 1900.
AND EVIDENCE SUGGESTS THAT
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THE 19TH
CENTURY, ROUGHLY THE START
OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION,
THE RATE OF SEA LEVEL RISE HAS
DOUBLED AND THAT GLOBAL WARMING
IS RESPONSIBLE AS THE WORLD'S
GLACIERS MELT MORE RAPIDLY
AND THE WARMER SEAS
EXPAND IN VOLUME.
IN SUMMER, THE COAST
MAY SEEM ETERNAL...
BUT IT'S JUST
AN ILLUSION.
FOR SOON SUMMER WILL END
AND THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN
LAND AND SEA
WILL BEGIN AGAIN.
WITH THE CHANGING OF THE
SEASONS COMES A NEW INTERPLAY
OF NATURE'S ELEMENTS.
AS THE NORTHERN
HEMISPHERE COOLS,
GLOBAL WEATHER
PATTERNS CHANGE.
THE ATMOSPHERE BECOMES
RESTLESS AND THE WIND SHIFTS
FROM QUARTER
TO QUARTER.
WAVES FROM OFFSHORE
STORMS RAGE IN.
WHILE RISING SEA LEVEL IS
SUBMERGING THIS COAST QUIETLY
OVER TIME, THE EFFECTS OF
WIND AND WAVES ARE IMMEDIATE.
THE HIGH, WIDE SUMMER BEACHES
ARE CUT BY STORM WAVES
REACHING FAR UP
ONTO THE BACK SHORE.
AS WAVES HIT AT AN ANGLE TO THE
BEACH, SAND IS LIFTED INTO
SUSPENSION AND MOVED DOWN SHORE
ALONG THE BEACH IN A LITERAL
CURRENT DETERMINED BY THE ENERGY
AND DIRECTION OF THE WAVES...
WHILE SOME SAND IS CARRIED
OFFSHORE FORMING BARS.
IN JUST A FEW HOURS A HIGH BERM
IS REDUCED TO A LOW, FLAT PLAIN.
THE EFFECT OF THESE
NEW COASTAL FORMS IS TO
SPREAD OUT THE TURBULENT
ENERGY OF THE WAVES.
LARGER STORM WAVES BREAK
FIRST ON THE OFFSHORE BARS
AND THEN DISPERSE OVER
THE LOW, FLAT BEACH.
THESE CONDITIONS TEND TO PROTECT
THE LAND FROM FURTHER EROSION.
BUT WINTER STORMS,
"NOR'EASTERS",
ARE MUCH
MORE SEVERE.
WATER LEVELS ARE HEIGHTENED
BY GALES, BY HIGHER TIDES,
AND BY STORM SURGES - A
RESULT OF HIGH WINDS AND LOW
ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE, ALLOWING
THE WATER TO BULGE UPWARD.
WITHOUT THE PROTECTION
OF THE HIGH SUMMER BEACH,
WAVES ARE DRIVEN TO THE
FOOT OF THE DUNES AND CLIFFS.
SEVERE EROSION FROM WINTER
STORMS TENDS TO BE LOCAL,
WITH WAVE ATTACK
MOST SEVERE
WHERE OFFSHORE
BARS HAVE NOT FORMED.
OFFSHORE BARS MAY
PROTECT AN AREA FOR YEARS
BUT THE DEGREE OF PROTECTION
VARIES AS BARS CHANGE.
IN AREAS WHERE
BARRIER DUNES ARE LOW,
STORM WAVES MAY
OVERWASH THEM,
CARRYING SAND FROM THE
BEACH TO THE BACK SIDE.
IT ORIGINATES
WITH THE SUN.
THE SUN WARMS THE AIR
AND SETS IT IN MOTION.
THE WIND BLOWS ACROSS
THE SURFACE OF THE WATER
AND GENERATES WAVES.
THE WAVES BREAK ON THE
SHORE AND MODEL THE LAND.
ALTHOUGH STORMS BRING
EXTRAORDINARY CONDITIONS
OF HIGH SEAS, THEY ARE IN A
SENSE PREPARING THE LAND
FOR THE ORDINARY
CONDITIONS
THAT RISING SEA LEVEL
WILL ULTIMATELY BRING.
THIS COAST IS ERODING.
IT IS RETREATING.
WHAT HAPPENS TO THE SEDIMENT
ERODED BY WINTER STORMS?
IN FACT, EROSION OF THE
SHORELINE AND THE LONGSHORE
MOVEMENT OF SAND PROVIDES
A SOURCE OF SEDIMENT
FOR ALL COASTAL FORMS,
OFTEN MANY MILES AWAY.
ON THE CAPE, WHERE NO
SAND IS SUPPLIED BY RIVERS,
EROSION OF THE COAST IS
THE ONLY SOURCE OF SAND.
MATERIAL SCOURED OUT OF THE
CLIFFS IS CARRIED ALONG THE
SHORE BY THE LITERAL CURRENTS,
THEN DEPOSITED AS BEACHES.
FROM THE BEACHES, SAND
DUNES ARE FORMED BY WIND.
DUNES PROTECT THE LAND
BEHIND THEM FROM FLOODING
WHILE PROVIDING A STORE
OF SEDIMENT TO BE USED
IN THE GIVE AND TAKE
OF COASTAL SYSTEMS.
AND IT IS EROSION THAT PROVIDES
MATERIAL FOR THE BARRIER BEACHES
THAT LINE THE COAST, PROTECTING
SALT MARSHES, ESTUARIES,
HARBORS AND TOWNS
LYING SAFELY BEHIND THEM.
BARRIER BEACHES ARE BOTH
TRANSIENT AND STABLE,
MOVING WITH THE WIND AND WAVES,
MAINTAINING THEIR EXISTENCE,
EVEN KEEPING PACE WITH RISING
SEA LEVEL BY BUILDING UP
AROUND THE VEGETATION
THAT GROWS ON THEM.
FREE MOVEMENT OF SEDIMENT IS
ESSENTIAL TO BARRIER BEACHES.
AT TIMES THEY MAY
HOLD BACK STORM WAVES,
AT OTHER TIMES BE BROKEN
THROUGH OR OVERWASHED.
BUT WITH THE FREE MOVEMENT
OF SAND THEY TEND TO SURVIVE
AND REPAIR THEMSELVES
AS THEIR PROFILE EVOLVES.
AND PROTECTED FROM THE
OPEN WATER BY BARRIER BEACHES,
SALT MARSHES THRIVE -
A HABITAT ESSENTIAL TO
MARINE LIFE AND ONE OF
THE RICHEST ON EARTH.
THIS COAST IS AN ENVIRONMENT
HELD TOGETHER BY THE
MOVEMENT OF SAND AND
THE FREEDOM TO EVOLVE.
TO TRY TO STABILIZE IT, TO
FIX IT IN PLACE, IS TO DISRUPT
ITS EQUILIBRIUM, THROW IT
OUT OF BALANCE, AND SET OFF
A BATTLE WITH NATURE THAT WILL
BE COSTLY AND NEVER ENDING.
ALONG THE COAST, HUMAN
EXISTENCE IN PAST GENERATIONS
WAS TUNED TO THE
RHYTHMS OF NATURE.
LIVES WERE LIVED AND LOST
WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK
OF NATURAL CIRCUMSTANCE.
COMMUNITIES GREW BY
HARBORS AND ESTUARIES,
SAFELY AWAY FROM
THE HIGH ENERGY COAST.
THEY WERE BUILT AROUND
NATURE'S PROVIDENCE
AND WITHIN HER LIMITS...
LIMITS DETERMINED
BY TIME, OBSERVATION,
AND THE MISTAKES
OF THE PAST.
PEOPLE WHO EARN THEIR
LIVING FROM THE SEA
KNOW ITS
ANNUAL CYCLES.
FOR SOME, ITS
ANCESTRAL HERITAGE...
THE SOLITUDE, BEAUTY, AND
BITTERNESS OF THE WINTER COAST
ARE PART OF DAILY LIFE.
BUT WITH THE GROWTH OF
COASTAL CITIES AND TOWNS,
THE DEVELOPMENT OF AMERICA'S
SHORELINE HAS LED TO UNPLANNED,
UNCONTROLLED BUILDING TOO
CLOSE TO THE WATER'S EDGE.
HOMES, BUSINESSES,
ENTIRE COMMUNITIES
GRADUALLY REPLACING
THE GRASSY DUNES.
BUT WITHOUT DUNES THERE IS
NO PROTECTION FROM FLOODING
AND NO SEDIMENT
SUPPLY FOR THE BEACHES.
AND WITHOUT BEACHES THERE IS
LITTLE PROTECTION FROM WAVES.
AS THE SHORELINE RETREATED AND
THE BUILDINGS WERE THREATENED,
ENGINEERING MEASURES WERE
UNDERTAKEN TO STOP THE SEA'S
ENCROACHMENT, TO SAVE THE HOUSES
AND BUILDINGS FROM WASHING AWAY:
JETTIES AND GROINS TO TRAP THE
LONGSHORE MOVEMENT OF SAND,
WOODEN BULKHEADS,
STONE REVETMENTS.
AND ULTIMATELY
CONCRETE SEA WALLS.
BUT THESE STRUCTURES FURTHER
INTERRUPT THE FLOW OF SAND,
OFTEN STARVING THE
BEACHES DOWNSTREAM.
SO MORE STRUCTURES ARE
NEEDED, MORE WALLS, BUT WAVES
REFLECTING OFF THE WALLS CAUSE
EVEN GREATER TURBULENCE
AND THE BEACH IS SCOURED AWAY
EVEN FASTER, UNTIL FINALLY
THE WALLS ARE UNDERMINED
AND CLAWED AWAY AT THE SIDES.
STRUCTURES BUILT TO STABILIZE
THE SHORE HAVE SEVERELY
DISRUPTED THE FLOW OF SAND,
WASTED BEACHES AND DUNES,
AND THREATEN THE
COAST'S DESTRUCTION.
A FEW MILES AWAY ACROSS CAPE
COD BAY, IN TOWNS ALL ALONG THE
MAINLAND COAST, THE BLIZZARD OF
'78 LEFT A TRAIL OF DISASTER.
IN THIS ONE TOWN ALONE,
HUNDREDS OF HOMES
WERE DESTROYED OR
SEVERELY DAMAGED...
STREETS UNDER FOUR
FEET OF WATER...
PROPERTY BURIED
BENEATH ROCKS AND DEBRIS...
IN A 15-FOOT
TIDAL SURGE.
AND IN ALL THE STATE'S
COASTAL COMMUNITIES
ESTIMATED DAMAGE
OF $300 MILLION.
AFTER YEARS OF BUILDING AND
REBUILDING AND AN ONGOING
STRUGGLE TO DEFEND
THE SHORE FROM EROSION,
A SHORELINE WITH NO
SAND LEFT, NO BEACH.
ONLY ROCK, STEEL,
AND CONCRETE.
THIRTY YEARS LATER, A PERIOD
OF MANY SIGNIFICANT STORMS,
THESE SAME HOUSES CONTINUE
TO BE DESTROYED THEN REBUILT.
MANY BIGGER AND
GRANDER THAN EVER.
AND THE ARMOR - ROCK AND
CONCRETE SEA WALLS - REPAIRED.
THE IDEA OF GIVING UP A VIEW
OF THE WATER UNTHINKABLE
DESPITE THE COST: THE
RUIN OF THE COAST ITSELF
AND THE CERTAINTY IT
WILL HAPPEN AGAIN.
ON THE CAPE, WINTER GIVES
WAY TO A NEW SEASON.
LONGER, LOWER, MORE ORDERLY
WAVES RETURN THE SAND
FROM OFFSHORE AND
REPLENISH THE BEACHES.
WHILE THE TURBULENT, HIGH ENERGY
WAVES OF WINTER KEPT SEDIMENT
IN SUSPENSION LONGER AND
CARRIED IT AWAY FROM THE BEACH,
THESE GENTLE SPRING
WAVES SOAK INTO THE BEACH
AND DROP OFF SEDIMENT
AS THEY ROLL BACK.
IN A MATTER OF WEEKS THE
HIGH, WIDE SUMMER BEACHES
ARE RESTORED.
THE CLIFFS HAVE
RETREATED...
THE WINTER SCARP IS COVERED
AND THE CLIFF FACE SMOOTHED
BY SAND AND GRAVEL
SLIDING FROM ABOVE.
AND THE BARRIER
BEACHES HAVE HELD.
EVEN WHERE THEY HAVE BEEN
WASHED OVER BY WINTER STORMS,
NEAR VEGETATION BEGINS TO
TAKE HOLD IN THE FANS OF SAND
CARRIED LANDWARD
BY THE WINTER WAVES.
AND AS THE SAND BUILDS UP,
CAUGHT BY CLUMPS OF THE
FAST-GROWING BEACH GRASS,
NEW DUNES BEGIN TO FORM.
WITH THE NEW SEASON
THE COAST IS REJUVENATED,
ONLY NOW IT'S A FRACTION
LANDWARD FROM A YEAR AGO.
THE EFFECT OF THE
SUBMERGENCE OF THIS COAST
IS TO PUT HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF HOMES
WITHIN 500 FEET OF THE
UNITED STATES COASTLINE
IN PERIL, AND THE
LOW-LYING AREAS,
THOSE CLOSE TO SEA LEVEL,
WILL BE HIT FIRST AND HARDEST.
IN UNDEVELOPED AREAS
THE CHOICE IS SIMPLE:
BUILD WELL BACK
FROM THE WATER,
UNDERSTANDING HOW
THE COAST IS EVOLVING
AND RESPECTING
ITS WAYS.
ON DEVELOPED COASTS THE CHOICES
ARE EXTREMELY DIFFICULT:
ARTIFICIALLY REPLENISH THE
BEACHES, SUPPLY MILLIONS OF
CUBIC YARDS OF SAND FROM
OFFSHORE PUMPING STATIONS
OR HAULED IN BY TRUCK,
UNDERSTANDING THAT
IT'S OFTEN ONLY FOR
THE BENEFIT OF A FEW
AND THAT THE NEW BEACH
WILL ONLY BE TEMPORARY.
ELEVATE THE STRUCTURES,
PUT THEM ON PILINGS
HIGH ABOVE STORM TIDE
LEVEL - 20 FEET OR MORE.
ARMOR THE COAST - WALL IT OFF
AT PRIVATE AND PUBLIC EXPENSE,
LEAVING IT SURROUNDED BY WATER,
SACRIFICING THE BEACH AND MUCH
OF THE ORIGINAL ENVIRONMENT
FOR A FALSE SENSE OF SECURITY
IT CAN WITHSTAND
WHATEVER NATURE BRINGS.
OR BEGIN A RETREAT...
MOVE THE BUILDINGS BACK,
PUT A LIMIT ON REBUILDING
AFTER A STORM,
AND BUY THE LAND THROUGH
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE MEANS.
HELP PEOPLE TO MOVE AS AN
ALTERNATIVE TO FLOOD INSURANCE,
DISASTER RELIEF, AND THE
ENTICEMENT TO BUILD BACK.
THEY'RE COMPLEX AND PAINFUL
CHOICES, BUT THEY WILL
HAVE TO BE MADE AS SURELY
AS SEA LEVEL IS RISING.
ALTHOUGH THE SHORELINE OF
THE SUMMER LOOKS THE SAME,
COUNTLESS TONS OF
EARTH HAVE BEEN MOVED.
THE COAST HAS
BEEN RESHAPED.
IT'S DIFFERENT THIS
YEAR FROM LAST,
BUT IN ESSENCE
IS STILL THE SAME.
EROSION OF THE COAST
IS NOT A PROBLEM WHERE
NATURE IS GIVEN THE
FREEDOM TO DO WHAT IT WILL.
ONLY WHERE MAN
HAS MANAGED BADLY.
IT WON'T BE EASY TO
CORRECT THE MISTAKES.
A HUNDRED YEAR STORM WHERE
THE INCREASED RATE OF SEA LEVEL
RISE DUE TO GLOBAL WARMING
INVOLVE A TIMEFRAME
THAT IS BEYOND OUR EVERYDAY
FRAME OF REFERENCE.
AND MAN'S OWN RESPONSIBILITY FOR
GLOBAL WARMING HAS IMPLICATIONS
FAR BEYOND THE
PROBLEMS OF THE COAST.
AT STAKE IS THE FUTURE
OF AMERICA'S COASTS.
THE BEAUTY AND BENEFIT OF
ITS EVER-EVOLVING FORMS,
THE WELL-BEING OF ITS RESIDENTS
ULTIMATELY DEPENDENT ON THE
HEALTH OF ITS SHORELINE, AND
THE GUARANTEE OUR COASTS
WILL REMAIN THE SAME IN
ALL THEIR NATURAL WONDER
FOR MANY
GENERATIONS TO COME.
}